# GIT

A version control system is a tool that manages changes made to the files and directories in a project. Its strengths are:

* Nothing that is saved to Git is ever lost, so you can always go back to see which results were generated by which versions of your programs.

* Git automatically notifies you when your work conflicts with someone else, so it's harder (but not impossible) to accidentally overwrite work.

* Git can synchronize work done by different people on different machines, so it scales as your team does.

Version control isn't just for software: books, papers, parameter sets, and anything that changes over time or needs to be shared can and should be stored and shared using something like Git [1].

**Git stores all of its extra information in a directory called .git located in the root directory of the repository.**

## **Git Commands And Some Features**

## 1. Repository Status

Displays the list of files that have been changed since the last commit.
These file are called un-staged files.

**Command:**

    git status

* Red means un-staged files.
* Green means staged or unchanged files.

## 2. Difference between current and previous changes

Shows the difference between the previous staged state and current un-staged state.

**Command:**

    git diff <filename/directory>
    git diff -r HEAD path/to/file

Here `-r` means compare to particular version and HEAD is the version before the change.

## 3. Stage Changes

The first step to store is to stage the changes.

**Command:**

    git add <filename>
    git add . //all files

## 4. Committing Changes

To save the changes in the staging area, you use the command:

    git commit -m "Message"

The above line writes a single line message. However in order to write more detail information run `git commit` and write.

## 5. History

Git allows you to view your previous commits.

    git log
    git log --oneline
    git log filename

The first shows all the commits with all details. The second compresses the detail in one line. The third shows the changes that occurred only in that file.

**Note :** The most recent commits are at the top.

Each Commit has a unique hash.

You can use the first 4 characters of has to see the details of a particular commit as :

    git show 0f91

A hash is like an absolute path. You can use HEAD, Head~1 and so on for the old commits as:

    git show HEAD~3

To view who made particular changes in a file, in what time and what lines, we can use:

    git annotate file.txt

In order to see difference between two commits we use:

    git diff ID1..ID2


## 6 .gitignore

.gitignore allows you to avoid saving files that are unwanted in your repositories. We use wild cards to denote what not to save.

```bash
build //any file or directory with name build
*mpl //any files with extension .mpl
```

## 7. clean

Git can help you clean up files that you have told it you don't want. The command git `clean -n` will show you a list of files that are in the repository, but whose history Git is not currently tracking. A similar command git `clean -f` will then delete those files.

## 8. Git configuration

Like most complex pieces of software, Git allows you to change its default settings. To see what the settings are, you can use the command git `config --list` with one of three additional options:

* `--system:` settings for every user on this computer.
* `--global:` settings for every one of your projects.
* `--local:` settings for one specific project.

Each level overrides the one above it, so local settings (per-project) take precedence over global settings (per-user), which in turn take precedence over system settings (for all users on the computer).

**NOTE :** Git configurations should not be altered for normal usage. However there are two configurations that you must change to identify the author of the changes.

    git config --global user.name username
    git config --global user.email user@example.com
